The Central Processing Unit (CPU), also called a processor, is the heart of your computer. A processor takes software instructions (such as turn this 0 into a 1) from your computer (the operating system) and implements these instructions into your hardware. It performs nearly all the actual computation that takes place as the computer is used. The choice of a CPU will affect the ultimate speed of the computer more than any other single component (gaming systems excepted; there the GPU is usually the bottleneck).
Clock speed
Clock speed, measured in gigahertz (GHz) or megahertz (MHz) (1 GHz = 1000 MHz), is the number of calculation cycles that your CPU can perform per second. Therefore, a higher clock speed generally indicates a faster processor. But not all CPUs perform an equal amount of work per cycle, meaning two CPUs at the same clock speed can potentially perform at very different levels. Clock speeds should not be compared for CPUs from different architectures (e.g. AMD Ryzen versus Intel i7). Use reviews and benchmarks to judge relative performance.
IPC
Instructions per cycle or IPC for short is the amount of work a CPU can do in a cycle. With modern processors this number is an average.
Multiple cores
 A chart showing the relation between the number of processor cores, and the amount of performance gained based on how much a task can be parallelized. Most tasks do not benefit from more than 8 or 16 cores, but additional cores can still help maintain performance while multitasking.
Processors sold today typically include multiple cores. Each core gives the ability to send out 1 instruction, so 10 cores can send out 10 instructions at the same time. This improves performance while multitasking and when running software that supports multiple threads. This also saves money compared to the old way of having multiple cores, which was to install extra processors, which required special hardware and software.
Adding more cores can seriously improve performance to a point, but cores are not multipliers of performance. A processor with 8 cores will not be twice as fast as a processor with 4 cores running most software, all else being equal. You should look at the recommended requirements of the software you are using, and pick the number of cores based on what it supports - More cores are still better, but not if it requires a significant cost increase or trade-off in clock speed.
Interface (Socket/Slot)
CPUs plug into a socket on the motherboard. It is very important that your CPU is a COMPLETE MATCH to your motherboard CPU socket. Plugging a CPU into the wrong socket will never work and will usually break either the CPU, the socket, or both. Think of a socket as a Lego brick (or bread board) connection between the CPU to the motherboard.
Bit width
Modern processors are either 32-bit or 64-bit (this is a simplification; The Wikipedia article on 64-bit for details). For our purposes a processor can be called 64-bit if it supports running a 64-bit operating system. The x86-64 processors sold today are 64 bit, with compatibility for older 32 bit software.
Many complex applications benefit from using a 64 Bit processor, such as Mozilla Firefox[1]. Some programs may only work with a 64 bit processor. A bit stands for a switch between 0 or 1. This is 2 options. 32 bit stands for 2^32. 64 bit means 2^64, which is the size of how much data you can fit into a given unit on the processor.
Simultaneous Multithreading
Some higher end processors feature simultaneous multithreading (SMT). Intel calls their SMT platform Hyper-threading which allows each processor core to simulate having two logical processors, effectively doubling the core count as far as the operating system is concerned. AMD Ryzen series CPU have a similar unbranded feature.
Cache
 The Memory Hierarchy. Registers offer the fastest storage, followed by L1 Cache. L2 and L3 Cache are slower than L1, but faster than pulling from the main memory.
Cache is memory implemented directly on the CPU. Data which is being used in computations is stored in the cache as much as possible and can be retrieved from there much faster than the same data can be pulled through the northbridge from main memory. Generally, the larger the cache, the faster the system will run. Cache comes in (usually) three varieties, L1, L2, and L3. L1 being the smallest and fastest, and L3 being the largest and slowest. Usually only the L3 cache size will be shown, as L4 is rarely used in processor design, and L1 and L2 will often stay the same size throughout an entire processor product line. Note that L4 is only in special Intel Haswell high-end CPU's , which contain Iris Pro graphics. They contain an embedded 128MB DRAM inside , which is represented as L4.
Process size
The process size is a measurement of size of the components on a chip. In general, the smaller the process node, the better, as more components can be used on a chip, and those components can be made to consume less power. As of 2022 most processors use a 10 nm, 7nm, or 5nm process size, with nodes expected to shrink to 4nm and 3nm eventually.
PCI Express Lanes
Modern processors support a given generation of PCI Express, as well as the maximum number of lanes they support.
Memory Controller
Modern CPU designs integrate a memory controller into the CPU. This determines the type of memory supported, as well as how many channels can be used.
High end Intel processors and most AMD processors may support ECC memory, which can correct for errors. This memory is usually somewhat more expensive than regular RAM, and is typically found in workstations and mission critical computers, where crashes and failures must be kept to an absolute minimum. Regular memory is fine for most users.
ISA and Microarchitectures
A Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) determines the compatibility of the processor with software. Most desktop CPU models use the X86-64 ISA. Deeper than the ISA is the microarchitecture, which is what actually determines how the ISA is implemented. The microarchitecture of a processor determines many of it's qualities, which are listed above. Without using benchmarks it is only appropriate to compare processors based on specification if they are of the same microarchitecture, and even then there may be caveats.
