CPU cooling
A aluminum heat sink with a copper base, heat pipes, and black fan mounted on the top. This particular heatsink has pre-applied thermal compound (The white square on the base), but this is not a given with all heatsinks. A CPU water block, the equivalent of a HSF for water cooling. The two holes are the insertion points for hoses.
CPU cooling is very important. A cool CPU temperature prolongs CPU life, sometimes by as much as 10 years, and allows your CPU to maintain a higher speed through Intel Turbo Boost or AMD Turbo Core. Conversely, high CPU temperatures can cause unreliable operation, such as computer freezes, or slow operation.
Extremely high temperatures can cause immediate CPU destruction by melting or burning the chip. Because of this, never switch on the computer if your CPU has no cooling at all. Trying to turn your computer on without a cooler installed "just to test whether my CPU works" is a bad idea and you may find that the CPU fries in less than 5 seconds and you will be out your money. If your computer turns off unexpectedly during use, it could be because of inefficient cooling. Modern CPU's automatically throttle when the temperature reaches its TJunction(usually 100C) and halts if it keeps on climbing.
Most CPU installations use forced-air cooling, but water cooling is another fairly common option. Convection cooling and even oil submersion cooling are more exotic options. For traditional forced-air cooling, the heat sink and fan (HSF) included with most retail CPUs is usually sufficient to cool the CPU at stock speed. Overclockers might want to use a more powerful after-market fan, or try water cooling to combat the increased heat caused by overclocking.
A small amount of thermally conductive compound is used in between the CPU and the heatsink to ensure optimal heat transfer. Many retail heatsinks have a thermal pad preinstalled. This pad is usable only once. If you wish to remove the fan from another CPU so that you can use it on your new one, or need to take it off for some reason, you will need to remove the pad and apply a thermal paste or another thermal pad. A poor quality thermal compound or application may result in less optimal performance, and a high quality compound and application may lower temperatures significantly on it's own. If you plan to do any high performance computing, or remove and replace the HSF often, a decent or high quality thermal paste is suggested. If you are planning on a long term installation a thermal pad is often best. Using one or the other is essential to ensure consistent heat conduction between the CPU and heatsink. Thermal compounds work optimally for a few years before they should be replaced.
Electrically insulating thermal pastes made up of silicon are the cheapest and safest, but silver-based thermal pastes sometimes perform better and carbon-based ones perform better still. When applied improperly both can be conductive, causing electrical shorts upon contact with the motherboard. A thin properly-applied layer will usually prevent this problem, although some pastes can become runny when they get hot. Users should also beware that many "silver" thermal pastes do not actually contain any silver metal.
For quiet operation, start with a low-heat (low wattage) CPU. You can also underclock your CPU, giving up some unneeded performance for some peace and quiet. Another option is to choose a large copper heat sink with an open fin pattern. However, true fanless operation is difficult to achieve in most case designs. You can position a case fan to blow across the heat sink, or mount a fan on the heat sink. With either choice, a large and slow fan will give better airflow and less noise than a small and fast fan.
Some low-noise CPU cooling fans require special mounting hardware on the motherboard. Be sure that the cooling systems you choose are compatible with your motherboard.
