Key Parts are Cases, PSU, Motherboard, CPU, Storage, and RAM to make your computer functional. Case - The case houses and protects rest of the parts, and contains additional functions like button, front IO ports, and other features. Power Supply Unit/PSU – Power Supply Unit, converts outlet power, which is alternating current (AC), to direct current (DC) which is required by internal components, as well as providing appropriate voltages and currents for these internal components.
Motherboard/mainboard – A board that facilitates communications between components and offers ports to connect them together. CPU – central processing unit, the main processor of the computer. The CPU handles general and mathematically complicated tasks.
RAM – random access memory, the "short-term memory" of a computer, used by the CPU to store program instructions and data upon which it is currently operating. Data in RAM is lost when the computer is powered off, thus necessitating a storage drive. Storage - either HDD (Hard disk drive - noisy and slower of the two but less expensive) and/or SSD (solid state drive. Quiet, very fast but not as cheap) – the "long-term memory" of the computer, used for persistent storage – i.e. the things stored on it remain even when the computer is powered down. The operating system, and all your programs and data are stored here, so if you choose SSD then the system will be faster. These days, SSDs have replaced HDDs for almost everything but the lowest-end laptops and desktops, but if you only need to surf the web, HDDs are the best option. OSes can be booted and use storage from inexpensive USB Drives, although this is only with extremely lightweight systems.
Optional Components
Optional components follow: (Components that depend on the function that will be given to the machine)
GPU/Graphics Card – does processing relating to video output. If you want to build a gaming PC, a good GPU is almost mandatory. Some processors have an integrated GPU built in so you don’t need (but may add) a separate video card. Otherwise, you will need a video card. These plug into a slot on the motherboard and provide ports to connect a monitor to your computer. Optical Drive – device for handling optical disks. May read CDs, DVDs, Blu-Rays or other optical media. Some drives are able to write optical media as well as read it.
Sound hardware - Now integrated into motherboards, higher end sound hardware may be a good option for some users.
External Components On top of the internal components listed above, you will also need these external components: Keyboard – for typing on. A good keyboard will increase your comfort, as well as make you a more productive typist.
Mouse – for pointing and clicking. A comfortable mouse can significantly improve your experience. Monitor – Displays graphics from your computer. They come in many forms, the most common being LCD displays.
Before you buy components, be sure that they are supported by the operating system you plan to use. Almost all commonly available PC devices have drivers (small programs that allow the operating system to recognize and work with a hardware device) available for current versions of Windows. If you want to run an alternative operating system, you'll have to do some research to make sure your hardware choice will be compatible. Many alternatives have extensive 'Hardware Compatibility Lists' (HCLs) as well as software compatibility.
